2019/19/README.md, before:

# [2019, Day 19: Tractor Beam](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/19)


## Solution Notes

Part 1 is well solvable with brute-force iteration, though the runtime is not optimal. The surprising part is that the Intcode VM needs a full restart (including re-initializing the memory) between each query; I assumed that it runs an endless loop that repeatedly queries coordinates instead, which cost me (and many other contestants) a few minutes of debugging.

For part 2, it's clear that brute force is no longer an option. Instead, the edges of the beam need to be traced somehow; I chose the upper edge, and try to find the lowest position for which both (X,Y) and (X-99,Y+99) are in the beam.

My initial approach (expecting the coordinates to be very large) was to compute the slope of the edge, so I have a good approximation of where the upper edge's Y is for any X. Then I did a coarse search for a working X with a large step size, followed by a fine search. This works and is really fast, but it has two caveats: First, the code is quite large. Second, there are situations where a 100x100 square can be found for X-1, but not for X, i.e. the "can a square be found" function is not monotonically increasing with X. This is bad if the coarse search lands at such a local minimum; that actually happened to me until I tweaked the search parameters accordingly.

Since the coordinates turned out to be not *that* large, I tried again with a much simpler approach: Just walk along the upper edge until the square fits. This is naturally much slower, but still bearable, and it's 42 bytes smaller, so I'm fine with that.

* Part 1, Python (brute force): 494 bytes, ~3.5 s
* Part 2, Python (fast search with slope estimation): 561 bytes, ~350 ms
* Part 2, Python (edge walking): 519 bytes, ~5 s

Commit message:

provide simplified task descriptions (first batch: 2019-2025)
Instead of just the link to the original website (which doesn't tell
what part 2 is about when the user isn't logged in or didn't solve
part 1 already), there's now a short, very abbreviated text that
describes the task in principle.

2019/19/README.md, after:

# [2019, Day 19: Tractor Beam](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/19)

This puzzle uses the Intcode virtual machine that has been fully specified in [day 9](../09), and which is going to be used a lot during AoC 2019.

The input for this task consists of an Intcode core dump of (typically) 420 words.

The program asks for a 2D coordinate via two input instructions and reports whether the corresponding grid cell is marked or not. Coordinates are all positive.

The puzzle description hints at the regular shape of the expected "image": Only the area between two lines starting at the origin is marked.

**Part 1** asks for the number of marked cells in the first 50x50 square.

**Part 2** asks for the coordinates of the fully marked 100x100 square closest to the origin.


## Solution Notes

Part 1 is well solvable with brute-force iteration, though the runtime is not optimal. The surprising part is that the Intcode VM needs a full restart (including re-initializing the memory) between each query; I assumed that it runs an endless loop that repeatedly queries coordinates instead, which cost me (and many other contestants) a few minutes of debugging.

For part 2, it's clear that brute force is no longer an option. Instead, the edges of the beam need to be traced somehow; I chose the upper edge, and try to find the lowest position for which both (X,Y) and (X-99,Y+99) are in the beam.

My initial approach (expecting the coordinates to be very large) was to compute the slope of the edge, so I have a good approximation of where the upper edge's Y is for any X. Then I did a coarse search for a working X with a large step size, followed by a fine search. This works and is really fast, but it has two caveats: First, the code is quite large. Second, there are situations where a 100x100 square can be found for X-1, but not for X, i.e. the "can a square be found" function is not monotonically increasing with X. This is bad if the coarse search lands at such a local minimum; that actually happened to me until I tweaked the search parameters accordingly.

Since the coordinates turned out to be not *that* large, I tried again with a much simpler approach: Just walk along the upper edge until the square fits. This is naturally much slower, but still bearable, and it's 42 bytes smaller, so I'm fine with that.

* Part 1, Python (brute force): 494 bytes, ~3.5 s
* Part 2, Python (fast search with slope estimation): 561 bytes, ~350 ms
* Part 2, Python (edge walking): 519 bytes, ~5 s
