2019/25/README.md, before:

# [2019, Day 25: Cryostasis](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/25)


## Solution Notes

This is a proper text adventure, so I started to solve it like one does: mapping out the maze with pen and paper, learning the hard way which objects are dangerous and which aren't. At the Security Checkpoint, it became clear that it's not just the number of carried objects that's important, but the exact combination. So I hard-coded the path to visit all rooms and pick up all items into my (non-golf) program and had it then try out all 2^n combinations (which fortunately isn't an issue at n=8).

This is, of course, no general solution, and not even a nicely golfable one. So I sat down later and added DFS-based maze exploration code that picks up all non-dangerous items along the way. It's not an optimal solution in terms of steps required, as the DFS returns to the starting position and the path to the Security Checkpoint has to be walked again afterwards, but it's much simpler this way, so I don't care.

* Part 1, Python: 1106 bytes, ~6 s

Commit message:

provide simplified task descriptions (first batch: 2019-2025)
Instead of just the link to the original website (which doesn't tell
what part 2 is about when the user isn't logged in or didn't solve
part 1 already), there's now a short, very abbreviated text that
describes the task in principle.

2019/25/README.md, after:

# [2019, Day 25: Cryostasis](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/25)

This puzzle uses the Intcode virtual machine that has been fully specified in [day 9](../09), and which has been used a lot during AoC 2019.

The input for this task consists of an Intcode core dump of (typically) 4780 words.

The program runs a simple text adventure game, expecting commands like `north`/`south`/`east`/`west`, `take` objects, `drop` objects, or list the inventory (`inv`).

The descriptions of what to do inside the game are deliberately vague: The player is on a space ship and has to pick up certain objects to pass through a weight sensor; after that, a password will be revealed.

The task asks for this password.


## Solution Notes

This is a proper text adventure, so I started to solve it like one does: mapping out the maze with pen and paper, learning the hard way which objects are dangerous and which aren't. At the Security Checkpoint, it became clear that it's not just the number of carried objects that's important, but the exact combination. So I hard-coded the path to visit all rooms and pick up all items into my (non-golf) program and had it then try out all 2^n combinations (which fortunately isn't an issue at n=8).

This is, of course, no general solution, and not even a nicely golfable one. So I sat down later and added DFS-based maze exploration code that picks up all non-dangerous items along the way. It's not an optimal solution in terms of steps required, as the DFS returns to the starting position and the path to the Security Checkpoint has to be walked again afterwards, but it's much simpler this way, so I don't care.

* Part 1, Python: 1106 bytes, ~6 s
