2019/13/README.md, before:

# [2019, Day 13: Care Package](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/13)


## Solution Notes

This is a proper simulation of a Breakout game! The hard (or rather: hard to explain in prose) problems like ball/paddle/brick physics are encoded in the Intcode program, and all the user has to do is provide input. Playing the game as a human is nearly impossible; it's too long and requires *very* precisely timed inputs. So, the actual task is to write a ... well, let's say "AI" for it: Track the ball and paddle positions and have the paddle follow the ball all the time.

For golfing, some shortcuts can be made: Part 1 draws the playfield exactly once, without any overdraw, so counting the drawn block tiles is sufficient. Part 2 doesn't require any kind of display or framebuffer either: The ball and paddle's X positions are simply latched whenever the objects are drawn, and the score is stored if something with a negative X coordinate is output. The Y coordinate isn't used at all.

The golf version expands on this and stores just two dictionaries: The first (`w`) is a map from X coordinates to values; for X >= 0, it doesn't contain anything meaningful (it's the tile ID of the last painted tile in that column), but `w[-1]` contains the current score. The other dictionary (`z`) maps tile IDs to their most recently seen X coordinate, which can then be used to look up the position of the paddle (`z[3]`) and ball (`z[4]`). This dictionary also contains a lot of bogus entries for each score that has been seen in the past (as score updates are just writes of arbitrary large values); in theory, a score of `3` or `4` could thus disturb the ball/paddle logic. In practice, the score increments per cleared block are around 50 though, so such a situation doesn't occur.

The non-golf implementation contains a console visualization:

    ./intcode.py 13.2-vis

* Part 1, Python: 432 bytes, ~100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 517 bytes, ~3 s

Commit message:

provide simplified task descriptions (first batch: 2019-2025)
Instead of just the link to the original website (which doesn't tell
what part 2 is about when the user isn't logged in or didn't solve
part 1 already), there's now a short, very abbreviated text that
describes the task in principle.

2019/13/README.md, after:

# [2019, Day 13: Care Package](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/13)

This puzzle uses the Intcode virtual machine that has been fully specified in [day 9](../09), and which is going to be used a lot during AoC 2019.

The input for this task consists of an Intcode core dump of (typically) 2200 words.

The program simulates a Breakout-like game, using output instructions to draw sprites onto a virtual screen with a coarse grid. Each draw command consists of three outputs: X coordinate, Y coordinate and sprite ID. Five sprites are defined: empty (0), fixed wall (1), destructible block (2), paddle (3), ball (4). If the coordinate is X=-1 Y=0, a score is sent instead of the sprite ID.

**Part 1** asks to run the unmodified program, which draws the initial screen and exits, and count the block tiles (sprite ID 2).

For **part 2**, a memory location needs to be modified to enable the actual game simulation. Afterwards, the program also accepts input, specifically relative motion instructions for the paddle (-1/0/+1). The task asks for the score after the last block has been successfully removed.


## Solution Notes

This is a proper simulation of a Breakout game! The hard (or rather: hard to explain in prose) problems like ball/paddle/brick physics are encoded in the Intcode program, and all the user has to do is provide input. Playing the game as a human is nearly impossible; it's too long and requires *very* precisely timed inputs. So, the actual task is to write a ... well, let's say "AI" for it: Track the ball and paddle positions and have the paddle follow the ball all the time.

For golfing, some shortcuts can be made: Part 1 draws the playfield exactly once, without any overdraw, so counting the drawn block tiles is sufficient. Part 2 doesn't require any kind of display or framebuffer either: The ball and paddle's X positions are simply latched whenever the objects are drawn, and the score is stored if something with a negative X coordinate is output. The Y coordinate isn't used at all.

The golf version expands on this and stores just two dictionaries: The first (`w`) is a map from X coordinates to values; for X >= 0, it doesn't contain anything meaningful (it's the tile ID of the last painted tile in that column), but `w[-1]` contains the current score. The other dictionary (`z`) maps tile IDs to their most recently seen X coordinate, which can then be used to look up the position of the paddle (`z[3]`) and ball (`z[4]`). This dictionary also contains a lot of bogus entries for each score that has been seen in the past (as score updates are just writes of arbitrary large values); in theory, a score of `3` or `4` could thus disturb the ball/paddle logic. In practice, the score increments per cleared block are around 50 though, so such a situation doesn't occur.

The non-golf implementation contains a console visualization:

    ./intcode.py 13.2-vis

* Part 1, Python: 432 bytes, ~100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 517 bytes, ~3 s
