2020/20/README.md, before:

# [2020, Day 20: Jurassic Jigsaw](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/20)


## Solution Notes

This is a highly complex task, not because it's hard to understand or requires specific, complicated algorithms; no, it's just the sheer amount of things that need to be done:
- input parsing
- generation of all 8 mirrored and rotated tile variants
- extracting the edges
- doing some statistics over the edges and how often they are used to solve part 1
- implement some kind of search to assemble the puzzle
- "render" the puzzle in a full bitmap without edges
- create 8 mirrored/tiled versions of _that_ again
- search for the "sea monster" pattern

The full-bitmap and monster search parts are textbook examples for situations where sets of complex numbers are really useful.

Puzzle assembly is surprisingly easy. The tile edges are unique, so there's always a fitting tile without any ambiguity. My initial "non-golf" version starts with one of the edge tiles that were already detected during part 1, and goes on in raster-scan order from there. For the golf version, I used a more straightforward depth-first search instead. It starts at _any_ tile, because absolute coordinates don't matter here.

A nice observation for part 1 is that generating the mirrored and tiled variants isn't even necessary, because the only interesting thing is the edges -- and these are simply the edges of all four sides of the tile _and_ their mirrored copies.

* Part 1, Python: 347 bytes, <100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 879 bytes, ~150 ms

Commit message:

provide simplified task descriptions (first batch: 2019-2025)
Instead of just the link to the original website (which doesn't tell
what part 2 is about when the user isn't logged in or didn't solve
part 1 already), there's now a short, very abbreviated text that
describes the task in principle.

2020/20/README.md, after:

# [2020, Day 20: Jurassic Jigsaw](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/20)

The input consists of (typically) 144 "puzzle tiles", each identified by a 4-digit number and described as a (typically) 10x10 binary grid.

Tiles can be rotated and flipped.

The cells around the edge of a tile overlap, i.e. a fitting tile has exactly the same pattern on its edge as the tile that it fits into. The edges themselves are not even part of the "image" that the puzzle shows and can be removed after assembly.

**Part 1** asks for the IDs of the corner tiles.

**Part 2** asks to find a specific 2D pattern in the assembled puzzle.


## Solution Notes

This is a highly complex task, not because it's hard to understand or requires specific, complicated algorithms; no, it's just the sheer amount of things that need to be done:
- input parsing
- generation of all 8 mirrored and rotated tile variants
- extracting the edges
- doing some statistics over the edges and how often they are used to solve part 1
- implement some kind of search to assemble the puzzle
- "render" the puzzle in a full bitmap without edges
- create 8 mirrored/tiled versions of _that_ again
- search for the "sea monster" pattern

The full-bitmap and monster search parts are textbook examples for situations where sets of complex numbers are really useful.

Puzzle assembly is surprisingly easy. The tile edges are unique, so there's always a fitting tile without any ambiguity. My initial "non-golf" version starts with one of the edge tiles that were already detected during part 1, and goes on in raster-scan order from there. For the golf version, I used a more straightforward depth-first search instead. It starts at _any_ tile, because absolute coordinates don't matter here.

A nice observation for part 1 is that generating the mirrored and tiled variants isn't even necessary, because the only interesting thing is the edges -- and these are simply the edges of all four sides of the tile _and_ their mirrored copies.

* Part 1, Python: 347 bytes, <100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 879 bytes, ~150 ms
