2021/20/README.md, before:

# [2021, Day 20: Trench Map](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/20)


## Solution Notes

On the surface, this is just a generic 2D cellular automaton using an arbitrary 512-bit rule for the binary 3x3 neighborhood. The nasty part is the "infinite grid" condition and that its unpleasant implications are only really exercised by the actual input, and not the example: Slots 0 and 511 have "inverting" behavior, meaning that the void outside the used part of the map toggles every iteration, having some effect on the map boundaries.

There may be direct ways to handle this kind of condition, but I didn't bother (not least because I'm trying to do some code golf here); when simulating `t` iterations, I simply extended the grid by `2*t` cells on all four edges and cut away `t` of them before computing the final tally. The latter part is important, because my sloppy implementation assumes that the void (outside of the padding area) is always `.` (never `#`), which isn't correct and thus results in a few artifacts in the padding area; that's why it has to be removed to get correct results.

Part 2 uses the same approach, just with a higher iteration count, which pushes it firmly into the "just barely acceptable" performance region. There's lots of possible way to optimize things (like dynamically extending the padding area), but I decided not to bother.

* Part 1, Python: 365 bytes, <100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 375 bytes, ~10 s

Commit message:

provide simplified task descriptions (first batch: 2019-2025)
Instead of just the link to the original website (which doesn't tell
what part 2 is about when the user isn't logged in or didn't solve
part 1 already), there's now a short, very abbreviated text that
describes the task in principle.

2021/20/README.md, after:

# [2021, Day 20: Trench Map](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/20)

The input consists of a 512-element binary map and a (typically) 100x100 grid, densely populated with objects.

At each time step, the presence or absence of an object in any spot of the grid is defined by looking at the 3x3 neighborhood of each cell, encoding the presence or absence of an object in each of the 9 cells into a number, and using that as an index into the binary map.

**Parts 1 and 2** ask to simulate 2 and 50 time steps, respectively.


## Solution Notes

On the surface, this is just a generic 2D cellular automaton using an arbitrary 512-bit rule for the binary 3x3 neighborhood. The nasty part is the "infinite grid" condition and that its unpleasant implications are only really exercised by the actual input, and not the example: Slots 0 and 511 have "inverting" behavior, meaning that the void outside the used part of the map toggles every iteration, having some effect on the map boundaries.

There may be direct ways to handle this kind of condition, but I didn't bother (not least because I'm trying to do some code golf here); when simulating `t` iterations, I simply extended the grid by `2*t` cells on all four edges and cut away `t` of them before computing the final tally. The latter part is important, because my sloppy implementation assumes that the void (outside of the padding area) is always `.` (never `#`), which isn't correct and thus results in a few artifacts in the padding area; that's why it has to be removed to get correct results.

Part 2 uses the same approach, just with a higher iteration count, which pushes it firmly into the "just barely acceptable" performance region. There's lots of possible way to optimize things (like dynamically extending the padding area), but I decided not to bother.

* Part 1, Python: 365 bytes, <100 ms
* Part 2, Python: 375 bytes, ~10 s
